In compliance with the request of a friend of mine, who wrote me from the East, I called on good-natured, garrulous old Simon Wheeler, and inquired after my friend’s friend, Leonidas W. Smiley, as requested to do, and I hereunto append the result.  I have a lurking suspicion that Leonidas W. Smiley is a myth; that my friend never knew such a personage; and that he only conjectured that if I asked old Wheeler about him, it would remind him of his infamous Jim Smiley, and he would go to work and bore me to death with some infernal reminiscence of him as long and tedious as it should be useless to me.  If that was the design, it succeeded.

I found Simon Wheeler dozing comfortably by the bar-room stove of the old, dilapidated tavern in the ancient mining camp of Angel’s.  I noticed that he was fat and bald-headed, and had an expression of winning gentleness and simplicity upon his tranquil countenance.  He roused up and gave me good-day.  I told him that a friend of mine had commissioned me to make some inquiries about a cherished companion of his boyhood named Leonidas W. Smiley—Rev. Leonidas W. Smiley—a young minister of the Gospel, who he had heard was at one time a resident of Angel’s Camp.  I added that if Mr. Wheeler could tell me anything about this Rev. Leonidas W. Smiley, I would feel under many obligations to him.

Simon Wheeler backed me into a corner and blockaded me there with his chair, and then sat down and reeled off the monotonous narrative which follows this paragraph.  He never smiled, he never frowned, he never changed his voice from the gentle-flowing key to which he tuned the initial sentence, he never betrayed the slightest suspicion of enthusiasm; but all through the interminable narrative there ran a vein of impressive earnestness and sincerity, which showed me plainly that, so far from his imagining that there was anything ridiculous or funny about his story, he regarded it as a really important matter, and admired its two heroes as men of transcendent genius in finesse.  I let him go on in his own way, and never interrupted him once.

“There was a feller here once by the name of Jim Smiley, in the winter of ’49, or may be it was the spring of ’50—I don’t recollect exactly, somehow, though what makes me think it was one or the other is because I remember the big flume warn’t finished when he first came to the camp; but anyway, he was the curiosest man about always betting on anything that turned up you ever see, if he could get anybody to bet on the other side; and if he couldn’t, he’d change sides.  Any way that suited the other man would suit him—any way just so’s he got a bet, he was satisfied.”

Here Simon Wheeler looked excited and interested.  “If there was a horse-race, you’d find him flush or you’d find him busted at the end of it; if there was a dog-fight, he’d bet on it; if there was a cat-fight, he’d bet on it; if there was a chicken-fight, he’d bet on it; why, if there was two birds setting on a fence, he would bet you which one would fly first; or if there was a camp-meeting, he would be there reg’lar to bet on Parson Walker, which he judged to be the best exhorter about here, and so he was, too, and a good man.  If he even seen a straddle-bug start to go anywheres, he would bet you how long it would take him to get to— to wherever he was going to, and if you took him up, he would foller that straddle-bug to Mexico but what he would find out where he was bound for and how long he was on the road.  Lots of the boys here has seen that Smiley and can tell you about him.  Why, it never made no difference to him—he would bet on any thing—the dangdest feller.  Parson Walker’s wife laid very sick once, for a good while, and it seemed as if they warn’t going to save her; but one morning he up and ask the parson if it warn’t going to be of use to lay odds on the thing, and bet on her his-self; for if it was, he would bet on her till he bust.  ...

“He ketched a frog one day, and took him home, and said he cal’lated to educate him; and so he never done nothing for three months but set in his back yard and learn that frog to jump.  And you bet you he did learn him, too.  He’d give him a little punch behind, and the next minute you’d see that frog whirling in the air like a doughnut—see him turn one summerset, maybe a couple, if he got a good start, and come down flat-footed and all right, like a cat.  He got him up so in the matter of catching flies, and kept him in practice so constant, that he’d nail a fly every time as fur as he could see him.  Smiley said all a frog wanted was education, and he could do most any thing—and I believe him.  Why, I’ve seen him set Dan’l Webster down here on this floor—Dan’l Webster was the name of the frog—and sing out, ‘Flies, Dan’l, flies!’ and quicker’n you could wink, he’d spring straight up and snake a fly off’n the counter there, and flop down on the floor ag’in as solid as a gob of mud, and fall to scratching the side of his head with his hind foot as indifferent as if he hadn’t no idea he’d been doin’ any more’n any frog might do.  You never see a frog so modest and straightforward as he was, for all he was so gifted.  And when it come to fair and square jumping on a dead level, he could get over more ground at one straddle than any animal of his breed you ever see.  Jumping on a dead level was his strong suit, you understand; and when it come to that, Smiley would ante up money on him as long as he had a red.  Smiley was monstrous proud of his frog, and well he might be, for fellers that had travelled and been everywheres, all said he laid over any frog that ever they see.”

Simon Wheeler rambled on, telling how Jim Smiley bet a stranger that Dan’l Webster could out-jump any frog in Calaveras County.  The stranger filled Dan’l with quail-shot while Smiley was gone to fetch a box to put his money in.  Dan’l couldn’t jump.  Smiley lost his money.  When he realized the trick, he took after the stranger, but he never caught him.

Just as Simon Wheeler finished his story, and paused to let me guess what the result was, a young man entered and called him away.  As he left, he turned and said, “By the way, do you—” but I let the old man go.  For I did not interrupt him once, and I think he might have gone on for ever.