She was one of those pretty and charming girls, born, as if through an error of destiny, into a family of clerks.  She had no dowry, no hopes, no means of being known, understood, loved, married by a man either rich or distinguished; and she let herself be married to a little clerk at the Ministry of Public Instruction.  She dressed plainly because she could not dress well; but she was as unhappy as if she had really fallen from a higher station, since with women there is neither caste nor rank: and beauty, grace and charm act instead of family and birth.  Natural ingenuity, instinct for what is elegant, a supple mind are their sole hierarchy, and make girls of the people the equals of the grand ladies.

She suffered incessantly, feeling herself born for all the delicacies and all the luxuries.  She suffered from the poverty of her dwelling, from the wretched look of the walls, from the worn-out chairs, from the ugliness of the curtains.  All those things of which another woman of her rank would even not have been aware tormented her and made her angry.  The sight of the little Breton peasant who did her humble housework aroused in her despairing regrets and bewildering dreams.  She thought of the silent ante-chambers hung with Oriental tapestry, lit by tall bronze candelabra, and of the two great footmen in knee-breeches who sleep in the big arm-chairs, made drowsy by the heavy warmth of the stove.  She thought of the long salons fitted up with ancient silk, of the delicate furniture carrying priceless curiosities, and of the coquettish perfumed little rooms made for afternoon chats with intimate friends, with men famous and sought after, whose attention all women envied and desired.

When she sat down to dinner, before the round table covered with a cloth in use three days, opposite her husband, who uncovered the soup-tureen and declared with an enchanted air: “Ah, the good pot-au-feu! I don’t know anything better than that,” she thought of dainty dinners, of shining silverware, of tapestry that peopled the walls with ancient personages and with strange birds in the midst of a fairy forest; she thought of exquisite dishes served on marvellous platters, of gallantries whispered and listened to with sphinx-like smiles while eating the pink meat of a trout or the wings of a quail.

She had no gowns, no jewels, nothing.  And she loved nothing but that; she felt made for that.  She would have so liked to please, to be envied, to be seductive and sought after.

She had a friend, a former schoolmate at the convent, who was rich and whom she did not like to visit because she suffered so much when she came home.  And she wept for whole days from chagrin, from regret, from despair and distress.

But one evening her husband came in with a triumphant air, holding in his hand a large envelope.

“There,” said he, “there is something for you.”

She quickly tore open the paper and drew out a printed card which bore these words:

“The Minister of Public Instruction and Madame Georges Ramponneau request the honor of M. and Madame Loisel’s company at the palace of the Ministry on Monday evening, January 18th.”

Instead of being delighted, as her husband hoped, she threw the invitation on the table crossly, muttering:

“What do you want me to do with that?”

“Why, my dear, I thought you would be pleased.  You never go out, and this is such a fine opportunity!  I had extraordinary trouble to get it.  Everybody wants to go; it is very select, and they are not giving many invitations to clerks.  The whole official world will be there.”

She looked at him with an irritated glance and said impatiently:

“And what do you want me to put on my back?”

He had not thought of that.  He stammered:

“Why, the gown you go to the theatre in.  It looks very well to me....”

He stopped, embarrassed, seeing that his wife was crying.  Two great tears ran slowly from the corners of her eyes toward the corners of her mouth.  He stuttered:

“What’s the matter?  What’s the matter?”

But by a violent effort she conquered her trouble and replied in a calm voice, while she wiped her wet cheeks:

“Nothing.  Only I have no gown, and, therefore, I can’t go to this ball.  Give your card to some colleague whose wife is better equipped than I.”

He was in despair.  He resumed:

“Come, let us see, Mathilde.  How much would it cost, a suitable gown, which you could use on other occasions, something very simple?”

She reflected for some seconds, making her calculations and wondering also what sum she could ask without meeting an immediate refusal and a frightened exclamation from the economical clerk.

At last she replied hesitating:

“I don’t know exactly, but I think I could manage it with four hundred francs.”

He turned a little pale, for he had saved just this amount to buy a gun with the intention of joining some hunting parties the next summer, on the plain of Nanterre, with some friends who went to shoot larks there on Sundays.  Nevertheless, he answered:

“Very well.  I will give you four hundred francs.  And try to have a beautiful gown.”

The day of the ball drew near, and Madame Loisel seemed sad, uneasy, anxious.  Her gown was ready, however.  Her husband said to her one evening:

“What is the matter?  Come, you have seemed very odd these last three days.”

And she answered:

“It annoys me not to have a single piece of jewelry, not a single ornament, nothing to put on.  I shall look poverty-stricken.  I would almost rather not go to this party.”

He replied:

“You can wear natural flowers.  It’s very stylish at this time of year.  For ten francs you can get two or three magnificent roses.”

She was not convinced.

“No.  There’s nothing more humiliating than to look poor among a lot of rich women.”

Then her husband cried out:

“How stupid we are!  Go and find your friend Madame Forestier and ask her to lend you some jewels.  You are intimate enough with her to do that.”

She uttered a cry of joy.

“That’s true.  I hadn’t thought of it.”

The next day she went to her friend and told her of her distress.

Madame Forestier went to her closet, took out a large jewel box, brought it back, opened it, and said to Madame Loisel:

“Choose, my dear.”

She saw at first bracelets, then a necklace of pearls, then a Venetian cross, gold and precious stones of admirable workmanship.  She tried on the ornaments before the glass, hesitated, could not make up her mind to part with them, to give them back.  She kept asking:

“Haven’t you anything else?”

“Why, yes.  Look further.  I don’t know what will please you.”

Suddenly she discovered, in a black satin box, a superb diamond necklace, and her heart began to beat with an immoderate desire.  Her hands trembled as she took it up.  She fastened it around her throat outside her high-necked gown, and remained in ecstasy at sight of herself.

Then she asked, hesitating, full of anxiety:

“Will you lend me this, only this?”

“Why, yes, certainly.”

She threw her arms around her friend’s neck, kissed her passionately, and then fled with her treasure.

The day of the ball arrived.  Madame Loisel was a great success.  She was prettier than all the other women, elegant, gracious, smiling and full of joy.  All the men looked at her, asked her name, tried to be introduced.  She danced wildly, with passion, intoxicated by pleasure, forgetting all, in the triumph of her beauty, in the glory of her success, in a sort of cloud of happiness made of all this homage, admiration, and the desires aroused by her beauty, her grace and her charm.

She left about four o’clock in the morning.  Since midnight her husband had been dozing in a little drawing-room with three other gentlemen, whose wives were enjoying themselves very much.  He threw over her shoulders the wraps he had brought for them to go home in, modest wraps of everyday life, the poverty of which contrasted with the elegance of the ball dress.  She felt this and wanted to escape, so as not to be remarked by the other women who were enveloping themselves in costly furs.

Loisel held her back.

“Wait,” he said.  “You will catch cold outside.  I am going to call a cab.”

But she did not listen and rapidly descended the stairs.  When they were in the street they could not find a carriage; and they began to look for one, shouting after the cabmen they saw passing in the distance.  They went down toward the Seine in despair, shivering with cold.  At last they found on the quay one of those old nocturnal coupes that one sees in Paris only after nightfall, as if they were ashamed to show their misery during the day.  It took them to their door in the Rue des Martyrs, and sadly they climbed up to their apartment.  It was all over, for her.  As for him, he was thinking that he must be at the Ministry at ten o’clock.

She removed the wraps covering her shoulders before the mirror, so as to see herself once more in all her glory.  Suddenly she uttered a cry.  The necklace was no longer around her neck!

Her husband, already half undressed, asked:

“What is the matter with you?”

She turned to him distractedly.

“I have—I have—I no longer have Madame Forestier’s necklace.”

He stood up, distracted.

“What! how? Impossible!”

They looked in the folds of her dress, in the folds of her cloak, in her pockets, everywhere; they could not find it.

He asked:

“You’re sure you still had it when we left the ball?”

“Yes, I touched it in the hall at the Ministry.”

But if she had lost it in the street they would have heard it fall.  It must have been in the cab.  They went to look for the cab; but they did not remember its number nor those of the other cabs.  They went to the cab company, where they were frightened at not being able to obtain any information.

That night they took their course on foot, returning home sad and dismayed.  Loisel, covered with cold sweat, sat down.

“Write to your friend,” he said, “that you have broken the clasp of her necklace and that you are having it repaired.  That will give us time to look around.”

She wrote to his dictation.

At the end of a week they had lost all hope.

And Loisel, who had grown five years older, declared:

“We must see to replacing that piece of jewelry.”

After a visit to the jewelers whose names he took down in a book, they found in a shop of the Palais-Royal a string of diamonds which seemed to them exactly like the one they had lost.  It was worth forty thousand francs.  They could get it for thirty-six thousand.

They begged the jeweler not to sell it for three days.  And they made an arrangement that he should take it back for thirty-four thousand francs, if the first one was found before the end of February.

Loisel possessed eighteen thousand francs which his father had left him.  He was going to borrow the rest.

He did borrow, asking a thousand francs of one, five hundred of another, five louis here, three louis there.  He gave notes, made ruinous obligations, dealt with usurers, and all the race of lenders.  He compromised the remainder of his life, risked his signature without even knowing if he would have money to pay.  And, frightened by the hardships yet to come, by the black misery about to fall upon him, by the prospect of all the physical privations and moral tortures that he was to suffer, he went to get the new necklace, and put down on the jeweler’s counter thirty-six thousand francs.

When Madame Loisel took back the necklace, Madame Forestier said to her with a chilly voice:

“You should have returned it sooner; I might have needed it.”

Madame Forestier did not open the case, as her friend feared she might.  If she had detected the substitution, what would she have thought?  What would she have said?  Would she not have taken Madame Loisel for a thief?

Madame Loisel now knew the horrible existence of the needy.  She took her part, however, all on a sudden, with heroism.  That dreadful debt must be paid.  She would pay it.  They dismissed their servant; they changed their lodgings; they rented a garret under the roof.

She learned the odious work of the kitchen.  She washed the dishes, wearing out her pink nails on the greasy pots and the bottoms of the stew-pans.  She washed the dirty linen, the shirts and the dishcloths, which she dried upon a line.  She carried the slops down to the street every morning and carried up the water, stopping at each landing to breathe.  And, dressed like a woman of the people, she went to the fruiterer’s, the grocer’s, the butcher’s, her basket on her arm, bargaining, insulted, fighting with men, defending her miserable money sou by sou.

Each month they had to pay some loans, renew others, obtain more time.

Her husband worked in the evening, making up accounts for a tradesman, and at night he often copied manuscript for five sous a page.

And this life lasted ten years.

At the end of ten years they had paid everything, everything, with the rates of usury and the accumulation of the interest.

Madame Loisel looked old now.  She had become the woman of impoverished households—strong and hard and rough.  With frowsy hair, skirts askew, and reddened hands, she talked loud while washing the floor with great swishes of water.  But sometimes, when her husband was at the office, she sat down near the window, and she thought of that gay evening long ago, of that ball where she was so beautiful and so admired.

What would have happened if she had not lost that necklace?  Who knows? who knows?  How life is strange and changeful!  How little a thing is needed to ruin or to save!

One Sunday, as she was taking a walk in the Champs-Élysées to rid herself of the cares of the week, she suddenly perceived a woman who was leading a child.  It was Madame Forestier, still young, still pretty, still attractive.

Madame Loisel felt moved.  Should she speak to her?  Yes, certainly.  And now that she had paid, she would tell her all.  Why not?

She approached.

“Good-day, Jeanne.”

The other, astonished to be familiarly addressed by this plain goodwife, did not recognize her.  She stammered:

“But—madam—I do not know—You must be mistaken.”

“No.  I am Mathilde Loisel.”

Her friend uttered a cry.

“Oh! my poor Mathilde!  How you are changed!”

“Yes, I have had days hard enough, since I have seen you; days wretched enough—and that because of you!”

“Of me!  How so?”

“Do you remember that diamond necklace you lent me to wear at the ministerial ball?”

“Yes.  Well?”

“Well, I lost it.”

“How is that, since you brought it back to me?”

“I brought you another one just like it.  And for the last ten years we have been paying for it.  You can understand that it was not easy for us, who had nothing....  At last it is ended, and I am very glad.”

Madame Forestier had halted.

“You say that you bought a diamond necklace to replace mine?”

“Yes.  You never noticed it, then!  They were just alike.”

And she smiled with a proud and simple joy.

Madame Forestier deeply moved, took her by both hands.

“Oh! my poor Mathilde!  But mine was imitation.  It was worth at most five hundred francs! …”