Little Mrs. Sommers one day found herself the unexpected possessor of fifteen dollars.  It seemed to her a very large amount of money, and the question of investment was one that occupied her greatly.  She did not wish to act hastily, to do anything she might afterward regret.  But it was during the still hours of the night when even her children were asleep that she finally decided on how it should be spent.  A dollar or two should be added to the price she usually paid for her daughter Janie’s shoes, which would insure their lasting an appreciable time longer than usual.  She would buy so and so many yards of percale for new shirtwaists for the boys and Janie and Mag.  She would get caps for the boys and sailor-hats for the girls.  The vision of her little brood looking fresh and dainty and new for once in their lives excited her like a banquet.

The next day, Mrs. Sommers started out in the morning with the fifteen dollars in her purse.  She waited for the cable car.  She looked down to the length of her appearance and could not help envying the well-dressed women she saw.  There were a number of stores; she went into one.  She had remembered that she needed to buy her own pair of hosiery.  She looked at a pile of silk stockings.  She had never bought silk stockings in her life, but she looked at them and her fingers picked the soft smooth surface.  A man behind the counter asked her if she wished to examine their stock.  She smiled and looked at two pairs of black stockings.  He drew them from the counter and she looked at them, then looked down at her own ankles.  She had never realized that they were rather slender.  The clerk asked if she wished them.  “Yes,” she answered; “I think so.”  Her stockings were to cost two dollars and fifty cents.  She resisted for a moment before she could bring herself to accept so unnecessary a luxury.  But after she had paid for them and they were folded in tissue paper and placed in her bag she carried them as if they were of uncounted value.  She could not have told exactly why she was not following her original plan of keeping the money for her children.  She went into a shoe store and bought new boots and gloves for herself, and then she went to a restaurant.  She ordered half a dozen bluepoints, a tender chop with cress, a glass of Rhine wine, a crême-frappée and a small cup of black coffee.  It was all very agreeable.

When she had finished her lunch she sat and idly watched the passers-by.  She felt like a lady who had come from a little this and that and now had nothing to do.  She took a cable car and went to the theatre.  She seated herself in a quiet corner.  The play seemed to be going on for her alone.  There were many others there; it was a matinée, and they were all ladies excepting a few.  She laughed at the actors and left when it was all over.  The play had been a very appropriate one.  The man who wrote it must have had his modiste in mind.

The cable car was about to start again when she took her seat; she seemed for a while to be losing herself in trying to figure out what the other passengers were thinking about.  There was a girl with red lids and oily hair, there was a stout lady with her velvet, and there was a man with a moustache.  They were all on the same cable car, and they had all been to the theatre.  They looked at her as she sat, and as the cable car reached her corner she took her purse from her pocket and began to count the money that was left: one two three four five dollars and a few bits of silver.  It was almost gone.

She gathered in her shawl about her and went on.  She felt like a little girl who had been playing with something that she had no right to, and felt the uneasy remorse that comes with doing unpermitted acts.  But she was not going through any acute suffering, or even remorse.  She carried no little responsibilities at the moment.  She was being carried away to a dream, and she did not want to come down.  As she went on her way she felt like one who had circumnavigated the world.  Her friend would not have recognized her.